Metadata endpoints documentation (#165)
resource-watch/doc-api: source/includes/api/_metadata.md

# Metadata

## TODO LIST

> + check if a vocab is used for language, and application

Reviewer: Didn't get this TODO, what was the question here?

Author: How does a user know the valid values of `language` and `application`? Is there a `enum` definition somewhere or can they consult a resource that describes the valid values?

| `name`        | String | No       | Name associated with this object. |
| `description` | String | No       | Description associated with this object. |
| `source`      | String | No       | Indication of the original source of this metadata. |
| `citation`    | String | No       | Citation associated with this object. |
| `license`     | String | No       | Reuse licensing terms associated with this object. |
| `info`        | Object | No       | Object containing any number of undefined fields. |
| `units`       | String | No       | Measurement units of the data variable associated with this object. |

## Overview of available endpoints

Metadata objects are always associated with a Dataset, and may also be associated with Layer or Widget. Hence, the endpoints for interacting with metadata objects are always sub-paths of `/dataset` and their associated `/layer` or `/widget`.

Any user can retrieve metadata objects, however to create, update or delete and object the appropriate [authentication](#authentication) credentials are required; a `403` `Forbidden` error is returned if authorization fails.

Credentials required for creating, updating or deleting:

> - You must have an `ADMIN` or `MANAGER` role.
> - You must belong to the same `application` group as the dataset associated with the metadata object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You must be a user with role:
    - `ADMIN`, or
    - `MANAGER` and own the metadata resource you are trying to manage.
- You must belong to the same `application` group as the dataset associated with the metadata object.
```

> Overview of endpoints

| Method | Path                                | Description                                                                                                                       |

> |--------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Reviewer: We are missing the clone endpoint here: [`router.post('/dataset/:dataset/metadata/clone', cloneValidationMiddleware, authorizationMiddleware, MetadataRouter.clone);`](https://github.com/resource-watch/rw_metadata/blob/36bada45c4d8e567d9c890f8c9de6edf9276771c/app/src/routes/api/v1/metadata.router.js#L242)

Author: Having some difficulty working out how to use `clone`; not sure on the correct body to POST

| POST   | `v1/dataset/:dataset/metadata/find-by-ids` | [Get metadata objects by identifiers](#getting-metadata-objects-by-identifiers) |
| POST   | `v1/dataset/:dataset/layer/<layer_id>/metadata/find-by-ids` | [Get metadata objects by identifiers](#getting-metadata-objects-by-identifiers) |
| POST   | `v1/dataset/:dataset/widget/<widget_id>/metadata/find-by-ids` | [Get metadata objects by identifiers](#getting-metadata-objects) |
| GET   | `v1/dataset/:dataset/metadata` | [Get metadata objects](#getting-metadata-objects) |
| GET   | `v1/dataset/:dataset/layer/<layer_id>/metadata` | [Get metadata objects](#getting-metadata-objects-by-identifiers) |
| GET   | `v1/dataset/:dataset/widget/<widget_id>/metadata` | [Get metadata objects](#getting-metadata-objects) |
| UPDATE   | `v1/dataset/:dataset/metadata` | [Get metadata objects](#getting-metadata-objects) |
| UPDATE   | `v1/dataset/:dataset/layer/<layer_id>/metadata` | [Get metadata objects](#getting-metadata-objects-by-identifiers) |
| UPDATE   | `v1/dataset/:dataset/widget/<widget_id>/metadata` | [Get metadata objects](#getting-metadata-objects) |

## Create a metadata object

> To associate a metadata object with a Dataset, and it's Layers or Widgets you need to provide your authorization token (`<auth_token>`) in the header, and POST a JSON object that must contain valid values for the fields `application` and `language` to the appropriate `/dataset/<dataset_id>` endpoint. If the object is correctly added to the entity a `200` response is returned, as well as the new metadata object. If the user is not authorized to create metadata objects a `403` error is returned; see the required [credentials](#overview-of-available-endpoints).

Reviewer: See my comment on the credentials for creating, updating, and deleting metadata - having a token is not enough to perform those actions. The user also has to have the role `ADMIN` or `MANAGER`, which means that `USER` role (the default user role in the API!) users cannot create metadata. _(maybe this is something we want to highlight somewhere in the intro sections, I find this very important for "common" API users that want to create metadata)_

I'd add a section below exclusively to detail the possible errors that can occur while creating metadata. And I'd refer these details there, along with the error codes/messages when we don't provide the required fields (which I believe we are missing in the docs)

                    "functions": "This data set displays the percentage of urban population with access to an improved drinking water source in a dwelling or located within a convenient distance from the user's dwelling.",
                    "name": "Urban Population with Access to an Improved Water Source",
                    "technical_title": "Percentage of Urban Population with Access to an Improved Water Source (WHO/UNICEF)"
                },
                "columns": {
                    "year": {
                        "description": "Measured year",
                        "alias": "Year"
                    },
                    "value": {
                        "alias": "Value"
                    },
                    "country": {
                        "alias": "Country Name"
                    },
                    "iso": {
                        "alias": "ISO-3 Country Code"
                    }
                },
                "createdAt": "2017-07-07T12:49:48.721Z",
                "updatedAt": "2017-08-28T14:30:17.701Z",
                "status": "published"
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

## Updating a metadata object

> As for creation, the endpoints for updating metadata objects follow the `dataset/<dataset_id>`, `layer/<layer_id>`, and `widget/<widget_id>` style. You need to provide your authorization token (`<auth_token>`) in the header, and PATCH a JSON object that must contain valid values for the fields `application` and `language`. If the object is correctly updated a `200` response is returned, as well as the updated metadata object. If the user is not authorized to update metadata objects a `403` error is returned; see the required [credentials](#overview-of-available-endpoints). If the request is invalid a `400` error is returned; potentially with a more detailed error message.

Reviewer: Same comments here as in the "Creating a metadata object" section about auth and errors.

They are particularly useful for allowing users to find relevant datasets, layers and widgets, understand their context, and for providing useful extra information, such as descriptions, licensing, and citations.

***As such, if you really want people to be able to use your datasets, widgets or layers, it is crucial that it has metadata!***

To find out more about accessing metadata objects already available on the RW API, check out the documentation on [getting metadata objects](#getting-metadata). If you'd like to share your data with the world, you can also [create your own metadata](#creating-metadata) on the RW API, as well as [update](#updating-metadata) and [delete](#deleting-metadata) existing metadata objects.

## Metadata objects

RW API's [approach to metadata](#metadata) is designed to offer flexibility; both in terms of the information contained and languages. Hence, when working with metadata objects it is important to understand a few key concepts. 

> The first of which is that metadata objects contain information about another RW API entity - a dataset, a layer or a widget. Thus, each metadata object belongs to a single `resource`, identified by its `type` and `id`. As this `type` + `id` pair directly or indirectly references a dataset, and for convenience, each metadata object also has the dataset identifier to which it's associated.

Reviewer 2: This "indirect reference" bit could use a little more explanation - just clarify that widgets and layers also reference datasets.

When it comes to its internal structure, metadata objects have a balance of structured and free-format fields that promote a common base across all objects, while allowing different applications and use cases to have their own specific structure and details. You can learn more about the available fields in the [metadata reference](#metadata-reference) section.

Last but not least, it's important to keep in mind that the behavior of metadata objects and endpoints aims to be, as much as possible, independent from the target resource it references. In the detailed endpoint documentation below we'll cover the different endpoints in depth, and highlight the differences in behavior when handling different resource types, but you can safely assume that, for most of it, behavior described for a type of resource will be the same for all 3 types.

## Metadata endpoints overview

> As covered above, each metadata object directly concerns a single dataset, widget or layer. The endpoint structure mostly reflects that, with each metadata action (getting, creating, modifying or deleting metadata) being available through 3 different endpoints, one for each type of resource. These endpoints will be documented as a single element, as they behave in exactly the same way, with the only difference between them being the actual endpoint URL. Any differences that may exist will be pointed out, but those will be rare. The only exceptions are the endpoints to load all metadata (which ignores resource type) and to clone a dataset's metadata, which doesn't have a widget or layer equivalent.

Reviewer 2: What 3 different endpoints? I would give an example here.

                "updatedAt": "2016-12-13T10:03:02.445Z",
                "status": "published"
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

This endpoint will allow you to get the list of the metadata available in the API, and it's the only endpoint that will allow you to load metadata for multiple resources at once.

It's worth pointing out that, unlike other similar endpoints on the RW API, this endpoint does NOT have pagination by default. If you query it without any of the optional parameters, you will get a list of all metadata objects for all datasets, widgets and layers. This is strongly discouraged, and **you should not rely on this behavior** - when using this endpoint, you should aim to use a combination of parameters to narrow down your response pool. You should also **expect a future update to this endpoint to introduce pagination** on all responses, so try to keep this in mind when using this endpoint on your application.

For a detailed description of each field, check out the [Metadata reference](#metadata-reference) section.

In the sections below, we’ll explore the optional parameters supported by this, which we strongly recommend you use.

> #### Application and language filters

Reviewer 2: I really like the way you've structured the filters sections here.

```shell
curl -L -X GET 'https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/metadata?limit=10' \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
```

Using the `limit` query parameter you can specify the maximum number of metadata to load in a single response.

#### Sorting

> Sorting metadata

```shell
curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/metadata?sort=name
```

> Sorting metadata by multiple criteria

```shell
curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/metadata?sort=name,description
```

> Sort by name descending, description ascending

```shell
curl -X GET https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/metadata?sort=-name,+description
```

The API currently supports sorting by means of the `sort` query parameter. Sorting can be done using any field from the [metadata model](#metadata-reference). Sorting by nested fields is not supported at the moment.

Multiple sorting criteria can be used, separating them by commas.

You can also specify the sorting order by prepending the criteria with either `-` for descending order or `+` for ascending order. By default, ascending order is assumed.

### Getting metadata for a dataset, layer or widget

> Getting metadata associated with a dataset

```shell

> curl -L -X GET 'https://api.resourcewatch.org/v1/dataset/<dataset-id>/metadata' \

Reviewer 2: Can we change this to `:datasetId` (same for other endpoints - `:layerId` and `:widgetId` as well)?

Reviewer 3: we've been using the `<dataset-id>` notation on all docs so far, and I was aiming to have it be consistent across the whole project. we can change it to camel case if you prefer it, but then we should probably do it everywhere, not just here

                        "description": "Measured year",
                        "alias": "Year"
                    },
                    "value": {
                        "alias": "Value"
                    },
                    "country": {
                        "alias": "Country Name"
                    },
                    "iso": {
                        "alias": "ISO-3 Country Code"
                    }
                },
                "createdAt": "2017-07-07T12:49:48.721Z",
                "updatedAt": "2017-08-28T14:30:17.701Z",
                "status": "published"
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

This group of endpoints allows you to access metadata for multiple resources of the same type with a single request. The result will be a flat list of metadata elements, not grouped by their associated resource - it's up to your application to implement this logic if it needs it.

#### Errors for getting metadata for multiple datasets, layers or widgets

Error code     | Error message  | Description
-------------- | -------------- | --------------
400            | Missing 'ids' from request body | The required `ids` field is missing in the request body.

> #### Application and language filters

Reviewer 2: Should this be under the errors table?

-H "Authorization: Bearer <auth_token>" \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-d '{
  "application": <application>,
  "language": <language>,
  "name": "metadata name"
}'
```

> Example response

```json
{
    "data": [
        {
            "id": "5f99b9317fe3c8001be2f272",
            "type": "metadata",
            "attributes": {
                "dataset": "44c7fa02-391a-4ed7-8efc-5d832c567d57",
                "application": "gfw",
                "resource": {
                    "id": "44c7fa02-391a-4ed7-8efc-5d832c567d57",
                    "type": "dataset"
                },
                "language": "es",
                "createdAt": "2020-10-28T18:32:17.464Z",
                "updatedAt": "2020-10-28T18:32:17.464Z",
                "status": "published"
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

This group of endpoints allows you to associate metadata with an existing dataset, layer or widget. To help make your resources easier to find, understand and reuse, we recommend creating the associated metadata right after you create your new dataset, layer or widget, but you can do it at any time if you want.

> As we covered before, the RW API implementation of metadata aims for flexibility, so the only hard requirements when creating a new metadata is that you specify the associate resource id and type, their corresponding dataset id, and the language and application of the metadata. Everything else is up to you to decide if you want to define or not, but the effectiveness of your metadata will increase if you provide more details about your resources. You can learn more about the available fields in the [metadata reference](#metadata-reference) section. 

Reviewer 2: Could use just a little bit of clarification here that the dataset/widget/layer id comes in the URL, not in the body of the request.

Reviewer 3: I took the liberty of making the docs even stricter, by telling the user to make sure that both things point to the same dataset id. This is what makes sense from an interface point of view, leaving us free to implement however we want. Ideally we would actually enforce this, but that's a code change for another day.

Any user can retrieve metadata objects, however to create, update or delete and object the appropriate [authentication](#authentication) credentials are required:

- You must be a user with role:
    - `ADMIN`, or
    - `MANAGER` and own the metadata resource you are trying to manage.
- You must belong to the same `application` as the resource associated with the metadata object.

> Overview of error messages

| Error code   | Error message          | Description |
-------------- | ---------------------- | --------------
| 400          | Bad request            | Query or body parameters are not valid. |
| 400          | Bad request            | "Metadata of resource dataset: `<dataset-id>`, application: `<application>` and language: `<language>` already exists". |
| 401          | Unauthorized           | The token provided is not recognized or is invalid. |

> | 403          | Authorization failed.  | Your user account does not have an `ADMIN` or `MANAGER` role or belong to the same `application` group as the resource associated with the metadata object. |

Reviewer: This table feels a bit lost here, I could use either some introductory text or a better description of when these errors can occur.

Reviewer 3: yeah, this table was compiled by Ed, and I wanted to remove it, but not without creating new ones per endpoint, which I did, but then forgot to delete this. Thanks

            "attributes": {
                "dataset": "0ffe5ad6-c920-421b-b69c-bc8893155df4",
                "application": "gfw",
                "resource": {
                    "id": "0ffe5ad6-c920-421b-b69c-bc8893155df4",
                    "type": "dataset"
                },
                "language": "en",
                "name": "",
                "description": "",
                "source": "",
                "citation": "",
                "license": "",
                "info": {
                    "organization": "",
                    "license": "",
                    "source": "",
                    "citation": "",
                    "description": "",
                    "short-description": "",
                    "subtitle": "",
                    "title": ""
                },
                "createdAt": "2016-12-13T10:02:28.337Z",
                "updatedAt": "2016-12-13T10:03:02.445Z",
                "status": "published"
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

This endpoint will allow you to get the list of the metadata available in the API, and it's the only endpoint that will allow you to load metadata for multiple resources at once.

> It's worth pointing out that, unlike other similar endpoints on the RW API, this endpoint does NOT have pagination by default. If you query it without any of the optional parameters, you will get a list of all metadata objects for all datasets, widgets and layers. This is strongly discouraged, and you should not rely on this behavior - when using this endpoint, you should aim to use a combination of parameters to narrow down your response pool. You should also expect a future update to this endpoint to introduce pagination on all responses, so try to keep this in mind when using this endpoint on your application.

Reviewer: "A wild deprecation notice appears" :sweat_smile: I'd flag the last sentence in its own paragraph (or at the very least in bold) since it's something that must not be missed by users reading these docs!
